
in the heart of the South Pacific Ocean
Samoa is one of the most remote islands
in the world
I've arrived here from New Zealand a
five-hour flight
Samoans are embracing every aspect of
modern life but there are consequences
and the Samoan Islands now have some of
the highest rates of obesity and
diabetes in the world in Samoa and
neighboring American Samoa 9 out of 10
adults are obese or overweight I'm here
to meet two of them tabata - harmony
from Samoa weighs 27 stone his kidneys
are failing
his doctors say he's beating himself to
death and he's only 33 in American Samoa
Lori May has type 2 diabetes brought on
by obesity she's going blind and she's
had two toes amputated she's 28 faced
you wish to without cry now she's
pregnant and if she doesn't lose weight
doctors fear she may lose her unborn
child
to start my investigation into what's
happening I've come to a weight loss
bootcamp in Samoas Capital Area
it's being filmed for a local TV show
called Samoas biggest loser I don't envy
lemon as heat
Tabitha's the heaviest contestant he's a
former taxi driver and is so obese his
blood pressures dangerously high which
is damaging his kidneys tell Peter silly
namitha prolific of for native son any
to Milania - I'm gonna miss alipio faces
if on my roller supermodel do it now for
one the other no money
the contestants are doing a fitness test
where they have to run faster and faster
[Music]
despite his best efforts taffeta is one
of the first to drop out
his wife Sarah is here to support him
the statutory voice every day I eat too
much and I change South dreams and none
of wrongful taffeta tells me until
recently he was drinking two liters of
sugar packed fizzy drink every day do
you worry about your health I'm so
worried about for my life because I know
I'm too much heavy yeah I'm so worried
because I really love my wife and most
of the people here are very aware that
if they don't change their lifestyle
they might die the big question is
though is that motivation enough for
them to change their diet
I want to find out what Tabata and
others on this island have been eating
that's making them so overweight he's
about to do his weekly shop this is
exercise for you tap it has got two
types of food on his shopping list first
locally grown veg for his weight loss
diet then the food he and his family
prefer all imported so what kind of meat
do you like to get in the last few
decades
mutton flaps from New Zealand have
become a Samoan favourite there's a lot
of fat yeah I've heard this cheap off
cut of sheep belly is over 40 percent
fat they don't eat it in New Zealand
they use it as dog food this meat isn't
sold in other countries did you know
that God is a divine IV I didn't do the
if you get for my how powerful we are
you didn't the earlier our yogi leader
blessed mom I didn't I made that in the
ad away well Tabata pays I noticed an
entire aisle of another favorite Samoan
food so this corned beef has over 20%
fat which is over double what you would
find in the same product in the UK a lot
of tinned food gets sent to Samoa
because it's so remote
that night Tabata takes us to dinner at
his dad's farm where he grew up for
himself taffetas cooking his fat free
dish of veggies for everyone else
including me
it's mutton flaps don't think there's
any meat yeah I love fat and a little
bit of meat by my rough calculations
this one plate contains more than half
of my recommended daily calories regular
family gatherings accompanied by big
meals are an important part of Samoan
life is it cheaper or is it more
expensive to eat healthily kill away a
fake more fearful yo le yo le Mariah I
never fear lately Ayumi ie my so for my
Halloween ax bill me ie mo my yellow for
new oh my lord me are you [ __ ]
so if Simone's can survive off local
produce why do they eat so unhealthily
okay though my only solace only only
only decision all if I own a la cama
Calle they tell me local food is often
seen as inferior to imported food
taffetas got his work cut out if he
wants to see his kids follow his new
diet and eat veggies
[Laughter]
eating really fatty food can be quite
dangerous do you worry about your
children falling into the same trap that
you find to hide bang I got a girl
fighting are you mom
yeah oh I get near the me I shall fear
fear fear you
I want to know more about the problems
obesity causes in Samoa which only has a
population of 200,000 they've had to set
up a diabetic foot clinic it's run by
Helene East Elin a new patient has just
come in for an appointment we've been
given permission to film but she doesn't
want to be identified
like one in five people in Samoa 41 year
old Annie has type 2 diabetes caused by
obesity the disease damages nerve
endings and restricts blood flow she
can't feel her feet and now her left
foot has collapsed it's probably not
gonna heal until she loses some more
weight I'm going to use this disposable
scalpel blade the wounds got worse since
Annie's last appointment and the flesh
around it has started to die I take it
back to where I think lost the dead
tissue is gone and the more you get rid
of the better it is for the healthy
tissue to grow it's really hard to get
my head around the fact that you are
scraping away her flesh and it without
any anesthetic another side effect of
Annie's obesity is a condition called
sleep apnea I noticed what she's all
done asleep as you gain weight
you also get four sleep cycles so it
means their sleep it's not very
effective so they fall asleep a lot
easier throughout the day they're
operating on you know like a chronic
level of fatigue he also causes brain
damage as well
she can't exercise because you can't
stand up because if you need too bad
cause of diabetes she can't lose the
weight so she's getting worse so she's
gaining the weight it's just and when
someone's sucked a lot of weight you
might think okay swimming would be a
really good thing for a but she can't
swim because of it wounds so like what
options does she have very limited in
the last 30 years the number of Samoans
with type 2 diabetes has gone up 20
times so the singing you can hear is the
funeral chapel for the Hoss
yes you can show
as lovely it is as it is
academic studies suggests the mowers at
risk of becoming one of the few
countries where life expectancy is
falling
[Music]
the situation in Samoa is bad but a
short flight to the east I've heard it's
the worst in the world
American Samoa was colonized by the
United States in 1993 percent of adults
here are overweight or obese it's
thought to be the fattest place on earth
I've been in contact with a maternity
unit that treats obese pregnant women
I've arranged to meet one of their
patients Lori May helps run a Sunday
school at a Mormon Church she's got type
2 diabetes one in three people in
American Samoa have the disease I want
to find out how it affects her
particularly now she's pregnant how
pregnant are you
I'm 11 week and I feel like it's been a
year doctors are telling Lori May that
if she doesn't cut down on sugar she
risks losing her baby have you changed
your diet since you had diabetes though
to be honest
diabetes is already affecting her eyes
and how's your eyesight I'm a gone so I
can't see anything on this side but this
one I still have little hope in it that
I said I can see with this eye but not
not a hundred percent it's just like 50
yeah after church she invites me home
for the family Sunday lunch what are you
making tail turkey tails are the
fattiest part of the bird a gland that
produces oil for feathers they're
imported from America and our a firm
favorite and Lori Mays family so do you
eat vegetables before pregnancy I mean I
hardly did like spicy vegetables outcry
I would literally cry if I look at
veggies when you have your baby do you
think that you would want to feed him or
her veggies I guess with my experience I
would love to make sure my my baby knows
not to go through what I might do at a
very young age that I am right now going
to want this yeah because you're only 28
on you yeah I'm only 28 Lori may saw her
mother died young at just 48 she had
diabetes too and died from a heart
attack
her dad coal money also has diabetes he
now uses a wheelchair and needs constant
medication have you changed your diet
since you've been diagnosed with
diabetes
well sometimes we got someone enjoying
eating food so but I'm trying to let was
truly after play football rugby kid come
and take about three or four can of soda
or one table it's I think this it's the
problem so this is Laurie may is meant
to keep her blood sugar levels under
control for her baby safety but she's
struggling to cut back on sweet drinks
soda was my addiction if I don't want to
eat as long as I have soda I'm good
because of the risks to her baby Lori
may has to go for weekly medical
check-ups her doctor's done a blood
sugar test and after Sunday's feast I'm
worried the results could be bad she's
seeing gynecologist dr. Frankel chopped
onion how are the results of the tests
for her today her she saw all fine
except for the blood sugar which she
knows he's there reading so and that's a
big problem actually how does the blood
sugar affect the baby well it affects
both the mom and the baby for the baby
one the worst scenario you can have you
can lose the pregnancy later on you can
have what we call an intrauterine that
baby can die without you and me knowing
it baby can grow so big to the point we
might need to do a c-section for me in
all honesty have you not had any sugar
since she's been pregnant with candies
and stuff no I have but I know I can
choose and through so yeah I do
because yesterday at lunch we had
concentrated juice which has got a lot
of sugar in it it was half water and
with it so yeah
that's why I didn't finish it all right
I can't help but think that Lora Mae
might be not being totally honest about
what she's eating
I think she's eating some sugar a lot of
people are in denial denial stage I
don't know
well for me I learned it first on basis
my daughter is diabetic so it's really
hard it's hard to to know that a younger
age she has diabetes and she has to
stick by what she knows to be dumb but
it's really hard this is easily said and
done the consequences of being in denial
are extreme the doctors tell me if I
want to get a sense of how bad things
are I should go to the morgue fagala is
the mortician he's been working here for
20 years during that time he's seen a
huge change there's three foot wide
coffin can hold a body weighing up to 35
stone but for garloo tells us often the
body's coming through here are so big a
special coffin has to be made
[Music]
they never sound more inviting vocal way
of war face just simple my mother she
working it's so heartbreaking talking to
the mortician who has been working here
in the hospital for 20 years and has
seen more and more of the young
generation of his people ending up here
with him on on a slab and he's saying
that he wishes he could meet them more
in life than then in now in death it's
just tragic
and back in Samoa and heading to the
diabetic foot clinic they've got a new
patient Sina she's not obese but she's
overweight and she has type 2 diabetes
according to the World Health
Organization since 1980 the global
percentage of people with diabetes has
more than doubled to 9% Cena has to
dangerously infected wounds on her right
foot Helene E has just taken a
photograph of them two separate on the
surface but underneath they're tunneling
that means they're just sort of
connecting with each other if the
doctors can't control the infection they
may have to amputate I'm worried because
I'm a fraud I don't want to take up my
fork despite her situation Cena doesn't
seem to know exactly what diabetes is or
why she has it I really want to know
what it cost
I think food people access sugar in your
in your blood from eating
[Music]
most of our diabetic clients were pretty
much having to start from the beginning
on education and getting them to be
aware of nutrition the clinic walls are
covered with government posters warning
of the dangers of junk food but despite
her poor health
Cena's family bring her a plate of chips
and mutton flaps for lunch
it's a frustrating for you to see your
patients sitting outside eating the
foods that are on the warning posters
inside the clinic
I told her off already basically that's
the last time you're gonna eat fries
you're not allowed to you phrase in the
next bed a patient has had their foot
removed after an infection started to
spread her Lanie's assistant is dressing
the wound
you know how cigarette packets have
warning signs of like really horrible
cancerous lumps or mouths or teeth or
whatever I feel like sweet packets
should have warning signs of amputated
feet that would be a really good one but
innovates they I don't think someone
people want to look at it they'll just
buy and then eat it
[Music]
I'm curious to see how Tavish is getting
on he's back at the Biggest Loser TV
boot camp but it's how you deal with
there be a Sarah Polley Co is the
fitness expert we'll be presenting the
latest update on TV this week in your
experience how many people do actually
keep the weight off once they've lost it
not very many less than 1% of people
that participate in these sort of
programs maintain the actual weight that
they lose are you 1% it's really low we
need to find real purpose for doing
things lose weight is a very artificial
thing to do you know the purpose is not
real you can't sustain after the eight
weeks it's going to all go back to
normal
[Music]
Tabata realizes the bootcamps just the
start he's made a life-changing decision
he's moving back to his family farm to
live off the food he grows
if I cannot bring over a decade the
first came from a photograph like a cool
matatini movie ma mama well axis I see
if amare shocking
[Music]
yes hours I didn't find amazing we work
this out early believe mama I don't
follow me we don't matter see there well
your father
[Music]
we found what we face in my box what's
happening in the Samoan Islands shows
how obesity is no longer an issue that
affects only wealthy countries it's a
global health crisis
a recent study estimated that by 2025
around one in five adults on earth will
be clinically obese
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
you
