the islands of the South Pacific
appeared ideally each forming remote
tropical paradise far from the rest of
civilization
but the Pacific is in crisis in recent
years poor government's economic
mismanagement and health problems have
plagued these island nations and despite
receiving more aid per person than
anywhere in the world Pacific countries
are struggling to meet UN Development
Goals I'm Joe Ambrose and on this
edition of one on one is we're intronic
to ask what is the future of the island
in the South Pacific in Tama known as
the friendly Islands life appears
carefree the tradition remains important
today in the capital Nuku alofa the
local boys college is Martin Lee 114
fifth anniversary with a parade for all
generations located between New Zealand
and Hawaii this isolated chain of 176
islands was never formally colonized up
until 25 years ago Tommen's lived
sustainably off the land and sea at the
cultural center health educator paul
verbally is showing me how opening up to
the world has led to some weighty
problems here the photos actually tell
the whole story about the changes in a
way and as you can see from the photos
the people are generally relatively
small compared to what you're seeing now
and of course over the past 50 or so
years we've seen in almost change in the
size of the town people the data that we
have is that in 1973 an average female
weighed seventy three kilos 2004 this
increased in 95 kilos and one average
male 79 kilos in 73 and in 2004 just
under 96 kilos so you've seen a dramatic
increase in the average weight so back
then these paper were sizing challenges
like typhoid and problems like that and
now they're facing a different challenge
probably a bigger target
the free Wesleyan Church is holding
their annual conference a festival of
faith and food feasting is a central
class of time-life with families joining
together to eat big meals every Sunday
and for important celebrations because
just like the culture the religion also
plays a big part and so people see the
preparation of food as their way of
expressing how they feel for their God
but overeating and a poor diet is
contributing to an obesity epidemic here
according to the World Health
Organization 90% of Tongans are
overweight with 60% obese the problem is
feasts are a typical meal next week
these church members will eat three
meals a day each prepared by a different
congregation or village they are showing
some restraint in previous years that
you see four meals a day eight of the
ten fattest populations in the world are
in the Pacific Tana wave in at number
four
Paul vivoli says providing bountiful
food is a sign of respect a culture hard
to combat if you have a guest coming to
your house and you're welcome there with
some food the more food that is
presented the more respect you're
showing to this person and so as a
results more often people are towards
giving more then giving less Islanders
who once existed on fish and vegetables
are now eating imported processed food
high in salt 2000 that barbecue
restaurants around town are open 24/7
filling greasy cutlets with little
nutritional value bigger size and this
contains six pounds of corned beef patty
mates in cans on shelves and supermarket
freezers is another peril there's now a
push here to have these mates band or
taxed cost is one of the main factors
and you know it's easily available it's
relatively cheap and so people it's easy
for them to open a can of beef and cook
it often they can use it to feed quite a
few people and so in terms of distance
it does go a little while to commute the
family and one of the other important
issues as well is the absence of a
healthy alternative and so if we can for
example impose a text or beauty on these
products make it more expensive and have
to use some of the money that we get
from that to subsidize a healthier
alternative
so that making healthy choices easier
choices becomes a reality and I guess
it's also difficult because
tollans your average Tolman doesn't want
the doctor to I guess interfere in what
they age yeah
many of the Tongans think that what I do
if my life is my business what happens
when I am sick is the doctor's business
but in Tonga a doctor's business can be
hard to stomach amputations and heart
disease have risen to record levels
80% of surgeries and 1/3 of deaths are
linked to lifestyle-related diseases
fishermen I see - Oh Ana lost one leg
through diabetes calls by unhealthy
eating the 45 year olds second foot is
in bad shape I'm concerned about my
other leg oh I want to take care of it
because I don't want it to get cut off
by cutting it off I can't do any work
losing a limb doesn't just mean losing
an income amputees he rarely live beyond
a decade lifestyle related diseases are
a slow death sentence carrying social
ramifications it's a kind of a downhill
spiral you know there'll be more MORE
about it won't be active anymore and
obviously their diabetes will not be
well controlled they also become a
burden to their friends and relatives
dr. C Ollie a koala is Thomas director
of health one of 50 doctors serving the
country's overcrowd and health system
patients like this nineteen year old
girl a symbolic of younger people
presenting with lifestyle-related
diseases normally associated with the
elderly here in Tonga is obesity and
lifestyle-related diseases causing
health crisis absolutely I mean like I
said I mean I think if you if you
consider the reduction in life
expectancy as a big issue
these are crisis the hospital clinic
treat sepsis missing toes and foot
ulcers every day one in ten Tommen's are
diabetic some Pacific nations have rates
of forty percent if the patient
deteriorates specialist healthcare for
cancers and kidney failure are
non-existent dialysis gives you an
extended lifespan
you know people live for more than 15
years on dialysis we do not have the
resources to have any deities and all
everybody who has any form of renal
impairment that ends up having end stage
renal failure they will definitely die
in time
the hospital runs weekly exercise
classes to encourage a healthy lifestyle
but in the dentistry department an
intriguing experiment is underway dr.
Celilo Tamaki is trying to help two of
his dental technicians lose weight he is
wired their jaws shut so they can only
consume a liquid diet one assistant
David weighing in at 135 kilograms has
lost 11 kilograms already is there any
danger to this I mean what if he vomits
whatever yes that's one of the dangers
if people vomit so we try to tell them
that he can take care around a pair of
cc's you want to vomit you just slip the
wire outside as I guess would think it's
it's a bit of an extreme idea it's of
one's jaws shot it is it is a big idea
and I know a lot of people may say we
are very cool but to the way we have
proved that he lost his 11 kilos in two
weeks
dr. Tamaki hopes his idea will be
implemented nationwide as wiring is far
cheaper than lap band surgery and can be
done in ten minutes we coached him
properly
after removing a wired see their weight
then I think there's a reward for them
did they see their weight this town the
blood pressure is okay in the sugar
level so they they want to remain that
way so they will continue to follow the
diet that they went through Tana is
successful amazing UN Millennium Goals
that address education children and
sanitation in developing countries they
must meet eight benchmarks by 2015 but
Tana is failing on lifestyle-related
diseases we are on track for meeting
under other targets like maternal and
child health but certainly for non
communicable diseases I don't think it
is it is realistic overseeing their
progress is the UN Development Programme
who opened an office here in May
it's representative since the country's
poor finances is holding development
back fools are concerned with the
ability to meet financially government's
operational priorities in saying that it
is realized that it is a concern as well
with the rising of public debt it's not
just Tongass health system that is
struggling the whole economy is in
crisis shouldering rising debt currently
at 174 million dollars I think it's a
it's a model that can be used by other
dependence on foreign aid is the main
problem for the country's Prime Minister
Ward Baccano
for my small developing countries like
like comma I think he cannot - without
the assistance of development partners
because we have a population of just
over a hundred thousand so and by doing
it I don't think you can have a lot of
money in order to do a real sustainable
development Thomas health sector does
receive government funding but it's
Japanese donors that are building new
wards and facilities at the hospital to
put it simply without aid that's on a
health system cannot function as with
most developing countries a lot of the
health budget goes into salaries and
when you take away all the obligatory
that we have to spend pharmaceuticals
and utilities and all the rest of it
where we end up with less than 1 million
for operating a Ministry of Health
tomah's Parliament has just started
sitting today they're debating the
budget which is surviving on loans from
the World Bank the country is at high
risk of debt distress and one disaster
away from financial collapse government
officials claim it will take three
generations to recover Prime Minister -
Eva Cano says these only options are
slashing public sector jobs and
privatizing 13 state owned businesses
half of which are making a loss it's
probably eight of them probably some of
them probably had yesterday told them
because I think it will just drain on
the resources of the of the government
and and some of them has not been
working so far it had been bringing
dividends into the government China
provided tana with a sixty million
dollar loan for reconstruction projects
after riots in 2006 raised the capital
to the ground Tom have received another
forty two million dollars from China
after the global economic crisis they're
almost impossible to repay the Prime
Minister hopes to win favor by voting
with China in the UN or have the loans
converted into grants we're working on
it but we know it's a burden but there
are things especially with the UM how
can we a system in what way especially
within the international arena heavy
Fonua
is a political commentator who runs a
local online news service and has worked
on anti-corruption initiatives with
transparency international he says
Tonga's escalating debt could lead to a
decline in government services an exodus
of school people and a withdrawal of
International farmers this is the first
time this year that we will actually
will really feel the pinch in the next I
think the next two is is going to get
with I think it's so bad that we have
been warned that we no longer can borrow
from the well bank and I assume the
agency one bank will be the same for
that fee is next few years and I think
it is that is how bad it is Thomas still
has an abundance of Natural Resources
pezzi says people will once more have to
rely on land and save if the country
plummets into financial collapse
realistically you can live here without
a pen in your pocket you can crawl your
food fill your house and on it so that's
a safety valve in a respect you may not
have a job but of course if the gun is
gone bankrupt then maybe you don't have
the health service then you don't get
the road fix and they don't take very
long before everything's just follow but
Tana is one of full Pacific countries to
have serious pressures on its national
budget part of the problem is this
region is unable to exploit the full
potential of its commercial sectors like
agriculture
this problem can be seen firsthand far
from the capital on Tamas remote outer
islands subsistence farming is common
here using an underground oven la jolla
ha is preparing lunch with vegetables
she grew on her family plan but she says
when it comes to using the land for
profit men make those decisions
I think his heart so sometimes I've done
I think the men in here sipping on the
ladies the finger things corner Lee the
props only their own need of their
family the hidden thing of other way of
growing crops to take it to overseas or
other countries to sell it out over
there because most in here is only the
way means the family depends on women's
land is underutilized around foa her
home island lassic says acquiring more
land is a lengthy costly legal process
and the island's isolation makes
commercial growing unprofitable but she
thinks a village could make better use
of their individual plots by working
together I would like the community
maybe women's and men to help me in
order to make more vegetable gardens to
look forward to help not only for my
family but for all the Holcomb community
land use is another challenge for the
prime minister I know there's a lot of
absurd England owners especially because
a lot of has migrated from the outer
islands injured to to the main island so
a lot has been left like in the other
islands uncultivated in so Trevor
bending has been trying to to see what
they can do in order to solve it open
but it's not an easy road for those who
farm for commercial profit despite its
fertile soils and ideal subtropical
climate Tana is a net food importer
farmers have been hurt by high petrol
prices irregular shipping routes and
have invested their energies in the
wrong crops it needs to be a national
strategy in terms of what crops should
we doing and and focus so it's it's
structurally diverse you need a minimum
of four product lines one crop grown
here watermelons are bulky and have a
low shelf life making them hard to
export over long distances the tyranny
of distance as a term that's been thrown
around in terms of the Pacific economies
right now I'd say that the main
challenge that we have for watermelon
would be the logistics I mean we're down
to shipping with any bit of we've only
got fortnightly shipping service which
doesn't make watermelon buy but what it
means is that only 50% of a crop won't
be exported because I mean once you miss
that cycles you know that the other half
won't go but having said that it's
always chicken and Anu you not you're
not able to establish a weekly service
which will make a lot of crops viable
unless you you develop the volumes to
the level so industry is actually
working on that now we're talking about
that with the shipping companies and
with government but everybody needs to
be doing their part
while the Pacific seems stranded who is
on the horizon
in towns farms and factories across the
ocean
these Pacific Islanders have traveled
2,000 kilometers to work here in rural
New Zealand in a program where they send
remittances holy such worker schemes
have become more viable as communication
and transport costs have dropped the key
thing is well nowhere in the Pacific is
is big enough that there's an urban
center where you're going to ever have a
highly-skilled high wage employment
available whereas on the outside of the
Pacific Auckland Sydney Brisbane San
Francisco you've got cities that are
short of Labor and where they're the
wages are so much higher so allowing the
free free movement of people from the
Pacific out to those room cities and the
free and the low-cost sending of money
and resources back is actually not a bad
solution 50% of Tongans population work
overseas
Sofia wholly manages 1,000 tom and
remittance workers they earn $20 an hour
here compared with just two dollars at
home I don't think it's the best way but
this is the best way today given the
situation that we find ourselves in
long-term employment in the Pacific and
I'm talking about all the Pacific
countries is never a guarantee whereas
over here you're more likely to be
guaranteed to come back every season and
earn if not the same probably better as
you become more skilled
the fascia believes Tonga can learn a
lot from businesses you and need to
harness better workplace skills at home
we have to ask ourselves why is it that
we have productive workers who are
appreciated
outside of Tonga what is it that we as a
country can do to make them as
productive for Tonga and the government
I think needs to look very closely at
how that can be done down Tommen's are
well educated but there are a few jobs
at home remittances represent an
opportunity to work abroad but critics
of allegiances say too many Tommen's
depend on their relatives overseas and
are too lazy to earn their own living
for people having problems instead of
going down and in crow down on things is
easier for them to pick up the phone and
ring up the sand all the dollars
overseas and do a little cry and of
course people who help right that's a
reality and it's not healthy and it's
not good
but by sending money directly to rural
communities remittances can be more
effective than a one of the big
differences say between remittances and
na it is the remittances are being
directed where the where the migrants
think it's it's best needed or where
their family so they may send it to
their families who then apply it to to
churches to microfinance or community
schemes or what-have-you
whereas with with AIDS it's typically
flowing through governments or through
NGOs remittances allow villages to
maintain their traditional life and
important extended family connections La
Salette ha says money sent from overseas
helps with school transportation and
family expenses this money bring us more
money in here and it helps a community
to have food if we were doing our own in
here the best money is slowed down our
our community a third of Tomas GDP
relies on remittances but they've slowed
down since the global financial crisis
affecting Latins village and communities
nationwide and so it is a risky business
to depend on religions it has affected a
lot of families now because a lot of
them just depend on this Tomer in other
South Pacific countries are only just
keeping their heads above water on an
ocean that stretches across 1/3 of the
earth communes are a pillar of strength
against formidable challenges health
governance and economic stability
for these small island nations to
prosper
they'll need not only faith but a
willingness to adapt to a changing world
